that success and achievement are connected with exhausting stress.
This is wrong.
You can live a completely different life.
Be a flourishing, joyful and at the same time successful person.
How to do it?
Hello, my name is Natalia Samoukina.
I am a practicing business coach,
an external consultant.
I have a lot of corporate orders.
I have 23 books,
one of which is called A Career Without Stress.
Today we will talk about stress management.
The importance of the competence of a successful business person.
The first time this word stress was pronounced by Hans Selye in 1936.
Let's draw such an interesting picture.
I call it a pipe.
1936.
Selye is a doctor.
He observed patients.
That is, the word stress, tension, fatigue, disappointment,
some internal difficulties,
arose when a person was sick.
In the 1950s, after the war,
psychiatrists began to talk about stress.
Because people with psychological injuries,
loss of loved ones,
a ruined house.
Let's move on.
In the 1970s,
there were jobs and professions where the word stress became commonplace.
Operators, cosmonauts, divers.
And now, in the 2000s,
the word stress is known even by a four-year-old child.
In fact, this young doctor-student Selye said that the time will come
when the state of tension,
depression,
will be felt immediately when he wakes up.
He will wake up and say,
I did not have time, I need to run, I need to hurry,
I need to do something, I have a problem today, during the day.
And he said that the first state that a person will feel is stress.
We live in this time.
But is Selye right?
Maybe you can live differently?
Look at this interesting picture.
In general, a person can be imagined as an interesting biocomputer.
Which has five files.
The first file is the spirit, our spirituality, our values, our meanings.
The second file is the intellect.
How we think, how we make decisions.
The third file is feelings, emotions, and worries.
The fourth file is the unconscious.
And there is also a file, our body.
What do I say?
I say that if we regulate each file in our biocomputer,
just as we regulate our real electronic computer,
for example, the Kaspersky system.
If we regulate each file, there will be no stress.
Our spirituality can be regulated by understanding our values, mission, meaning, life, and work.
Our intellect can be regulated with the help of positive approach technology.
Our feelings, emotions, and worries can be regulated through visualization.
The unconscious loves pleasure.
And we will also talk about it today.
The body is a healthy lifestyle.
So, we will talk about each file.
And I'll start with the file called the intellect.
What is a positive approach?
In relation to the intellect, there is an effective positive approach technology.
What is it?
We know from our life and professional experience that each situation, each person, and ourselves can be analyzed and assessed through pluses and minuses.
The classic way of analysis is SWOT analysis.
Let's try to talk about it.
When we get into a traffic jam, and we are in a hurry to a VIP client, or to a training, or a seminar, or to a hard-line manager,
what is bad in a traffic jam at this moment?
We are impatient, of course.
We are irritated, of course.
We can't change anything, of course.
We curse this city, this place where we got.
It's all right.
But you can't leave the car.
You can't run out of the traffic jam.
And so, in order to come to a VIP client in a good mood, to come to the manager on the carpet,
having a situation, you need to maintain a joyful, optimistic state and mood.
To be honest, I noticed this before, when people ran out of the traffic jam, argued, quarreled with each other, someone blushed, someone blushed.
Now, in general, Muscovites have already become, and in general, in any cities, people have become more experienced.
They understand that they can't get out of the traffic jam.
And they say to themselves, what's good about the traffic jam?
Let's talk about the advantages that the traffic jam gives.
Well, the first point is that you can better prepare for a meeting with a VIP client.
We have time.
Naturally, we will call him in advance, so that, of course, we will be late.
You can prepare for a meeting with a manager.
These are the advantages.
You can think about who you can call at this moment, having obtained additional information.
If you did it, and we are still in the traffic jam, you can call your parents.
You haven't called them for six months, you've already forgotten that your mother is waiting for your call.
It's very good for women to call their child and say some important words.
Many people are now in the traffic jam, they turn on audio books, listen to some important texts.
I, for example, noticed that they listen to Dostoevsky well.
I noticed that foreign languages are taught in the traffic jam.
Look how much good can be done in the traffic jam if we remember a positive approach.
Another situation.
We gave a large amount of money to a friend a few years ago.
And he still looks us in the eye and says, I can't give such serious money.
Of course, what is unpleasant for us in this situation?
We made a mistake again. We lost money, probably two times.
We say some unpleasant words to ourselves, blaming ourselves, why did I do it?
A close person blames you.
Remember, we wanted to buy it, and you gave money to your friend.
The situation has already gone.
And to maintain a good relationship with a friend and a close person,
and to maintain an optimistic mood and a good attitude to people,
what is good in the fact that we gave money to the debt.
Let's focus on the positives.
First, we helped a person.
Second, life and fate have shown us that money is not so important.
Help and what we were then, to help another, is probably more important.
And the third point, let's make a conclusion that we need to work more intensively to compensate for the money lost.
In every situation, even the most difficult, there is an advantage.
It is more profitable for us to highlight the advantages, because it gives energy and strength.
And it is not profitable for us to focus on the minuses.
Because the minuses reduce our energy, reduce our self-esteem, make us weaker.
Moreover, we know that if we are optimistic, happy people come to us, positive events stick to us.
If we concentrate on the minuses, sad people come to us, and not very positive, not very happy events come to us.
In addition to the fact that any situation can be assessed and perceived from the side of pluses or minuses,
it is also important to understand that a person can also be perceived either from the side of his strong bright qualities or from the side of his shortcomings.
Let's think, for example, now about that person, think about you, who is unpleasant to you.
You meet him in the corridor, in the company, you try to avoid communicating with him.
A few days ago there was a conflict with a colleague, and you are not pleased to see this person.
Think about the shortcomings he showed in himself, he showed in the conflict.
The first, probably, is irritation. He said to you unfair words.
He criticized you publicly, that it was offensive.
You tried, you made a project, and suddenly such criticism is undeserved.
Maybe he was self-assertive, maybe he competed with you.
All this is unpleasant.
But in order to maintain long-term relations, first of all, we need to remember the advantages, the strong, interesting qualities for us, even of the person who criticizes us.
The first point I would like to note is the position of a positive approach, which gives us enlightened optimism, which we are now talking about.
A critic points out our mistakes. A critic, in fact, cares about our professional improvement, our development.
A person who shows irritation is usually open.
And, to be honest, I see a huge advantage in this. He won't hit you in the back, he won't sit down until this political moment, he will say what he doesn't like.
A person who is excited is also open, and, as a rule, we understand him better, because he sincerely expresses his point of view.
Look at the advantages.
And the main thing, according to this situation, is that a critic, and the one who does not evaluate us very positively, cares about our further development.
We know, for example, a client. Love the client's objections. You need to love the client's objections.
The client develops us, makes us learn new things. If there are no objections, no interest in our product or service, the objections develop the business.
Look at the advantages of a critic, a demanding client. The same is true here.
But there is another point. Not only are we dissatisfied and we are not pleased, it is understandable when we are criticized, but we also do interesting internal work when we criticize ourselves.
We did something, we invested in the development of the project, we reported, presented this project, and everyone liked it.
We come home and start criticizing ourselves. This is bad, I didn't finish it, I was in a hurry, this is probably a mistake.
And we fall asleep in the evening with a heavy feeling. I noticed that clients sometimes say that.
And in general, I am nobody and my name is nothing. We destroy ourselves to the end. Is that right?
But from the point of view of a positive approach, it is absolutely wrong.
Of course, we know about our shortcomings. If we forgot them for a while, remember how we were scolded as children, our mother criticized us, or our grandmother, or our first teacher, or at the institute.
If you are so lucky that your mother didn't criticize, but only praised, and your first teacher praised, and at the institute we were praised, then of course there will be a close person, whether it is a spouse or a child, who will finally start criticizing us.
Of course, we remember or are reminded of our shortcomings. But if we only remember about shortcomings, there is uncertainty, anxiety, we don't want to do anything, and it is not beneficial to us, because we strive for success.
Let's think about our advantages, about our strong, bright, winning sides. For example, each of our shortcomings can be translated into advantages.
For example, our sense of guilt. We feel guilt. To be honest, it is a shortcoming. But let's look at it from the perspective of advantages.
This is a high demand for yourself, this is a desire to work better and better, this is an ability to put into practice to feel that this success is really deserved.
It happens that a person says, no, I'm fine, but I'm afraid, I'm very afraid to go to the center, I'm afraid of any public performance. I see an advantage in this, it's a zone of close development.
I always say, go to the center more often, tell anecdotes, funny stories to get used to this public role. I noticed this feature.
When a person is afraid to go to the center, but then overcomes himself, he tells very interesting things, he is very deep, because he has overcome himself, and the content that appears from him, not only professional, but also personal, is always interesting to others.
Because it is always interesting to other people how another person lives, how he overcomes difficulties.
I also noticed this feature. Sometimes in groups people say, you know, there is another quality, and I have it, it is laziness.
Most often women say this. I ask, what time do you get up? Well, at 5-6 am. What do you do? I work. And after work? You know, I help my husband's parents, help my parents, children, husband.
And you say I'm lazy about myself. A woman says, well, yes, in general, frankly, I think that I'm probably lazy, I could work more.
In fact, laziness should also be treated well. Barbara Bylska, for example, says that a lazy woman is a feminine woman.
A lazy person, as men say, is a person who builds a civilization, who thinks not how to do it intensively, but how to do it more optimally, logistically correctly.
A lazy person, as a rule, is a good philosopher. Remember our Oblomov, who lay on the couch and based on his life a classic novel was built.
Lazy people are finally good people. Lazy people are more loved in our culture because they are kind, positive, relaxed, soft, than hard-working people.
While we are not very used to the fact that a person works, does not spare himself, he is tough, a woman becomes tough in business.
I think, of course, there will come a time when we will get used to it. But look at what a hell I sang to such a quality as laziness.
Therefore, in the morning, instead of scolding yourself, and in the evening, instead of scolding yourself, you need to tell yourself what strong qualities you have, what winning advantages you will sell in business.
And in the evening you need to say what you have done or did during the day, and, of course, praise yourself for the energy, for the intensity in which you are throwing yourself now.
I draw a conclusion. So, dear friends, a positive approach, to be honest, is a technology of enlightened optimism.
This is not the optimism when they say, everything is fine, think only about the good. No, this is what we know, that not everything is fine.
In every situation, in every person, and in us too, there are difficult, difficult sides, but in every situation there are joyful, easy features and conditions.
We will remember what obstacles there are and we will try to overcome them. And we will remember that energy, ability to work, self-confidence appears when we highlight our own advantages, when we communicate with another person highlighting his advantages.
And, to be honest, we do not get into a difficult, difficult situation, an impassable one, a traffic jam, for example, or money in debt.
When we remember that this is also a life or professional lesson, and maybe in the future, in 5 or 20 years, we will remember this situation with gratitude, because it made us grow a new competence, a new quality.
And, indeed, as our bard Andrei Bakarevich sings, difficulties make us stronger. We have another file where energy is bright, powerful, dense.
I sometimes say, if I represent our qualities, our abilities, not as files, but as floors of a huge building, then the floor of the intellect is correct, bright, everything is put on shelves.
And the floor where our feelings, emotions, and experiences are a bubbling stream, everything is mixed there. And, indeed, as a result of stress, someone becomes passive, apathetic, depression begins, you don't want anything.
And, to be honest, one of the criteria, if you are happy that a client did not come to the meeting, is the result of burning out of stress. If you are happy that two weeks of January holidays are ahead, this can also be a result of burning out and fatigue.
But there is another manifestation of stress on this floor, when we are overexcited, irritated, we start to fuss, we drop documents, we are in a hurry somewhere.
And in Moscow offices there is such a thing, which only we have, office rabble, when people throw their mobile phones, papers, folders, when they run out, knock on the door, run in, scream, cry.
I had a supervisor, who I observed, he periodically had such a cute feature, he grabbed a liquid crystal computer, threw it on the floor, tried to trample it. In a state of aggression, rabble, this excitement, it's all stress.
Stress is all stress on this floor. It is an inability to cope with one's emotions and feelings. And at this moment, when we are excited or when we don't care, it's hard to persuade ourselves.
Because a positive approach is, of course, a technology to persuade yourself. And when we are shaken, or when we don't care, it's hard to persuade yourself.
Therefore, if you feel that this floor is burning with emotions, feelings, and worries, an effective technique is visualization.
Then start with images, I will tell you now which ones, and then you will start to persuade yourself. Let's try.
Imagine, please, that now, after viewing this training material, you have a trip to the dentist scheduled for a certain time.
You drive up to the dental clinic, go up to the appropriate floor, you already feel the sounds, the appropriate smells, and approach the office where you often go to your doctor.
You look at the clock, exactly at the time you are scheduled, look into the office, there is no one, but you have a good, friendly relationship with the doctor for a long time.
You enter the office and sit in the dentist's chair. Imagine yourself in a dentist's chair. Usually, on the right, a little further, there is the favorite NAMI machine, which is called a drill machine.
We still have some tension in relation to it, it doesn't hurt anymore, some painless injections are already being done, and yet we start to strain when we look at this iron tool.
On the right are the tools with which the doctor will examine our oral cavity. And, foreseeing all these events, we begin to strain.
The door opens, and behind, you feel, a young nurse comes up to you and says, oh, sorry, the doctor is sick, come tomorrow.
What do you feel? I agreed, I allocated time, and the doctor did not even inform me that he was sick. But most people are sincerely happy if there is no acute pain.
I told you that the visit, as if it happened, but the treatment itself is postponed for at least a day, there is still a day of calm existence. What was I talking about? I was talking about the image that arises and changes our state.
I told you about the exercise of Kristallnachtschreiner. He says, as a result, do not live your life as if you are sitting in the chair of a dentist all the time. And maybe this traumatic event will not happen.
Because we can visualize images that are unpleasant for ourselves, the future that will be now. And we can visualize the opposite, pleasant, positive, good images.
For example, the image of a shelter is a good exercise that helps to calm down, especially for those people who communicate a lot at client work or for managers who have to manage a large number of people.
Think, please, that each of us has our own shelter. This is some real space or a fictional, fantastic, virtual space, I don't know, maybe a spaceship to Mars.
Some space where no one pulls us, no phones, no mobile, no stationary, no clients, no subordinates, no forced, intense, difficult, complex communication.
You can do nothing there or do whatever you want. Someone listens to music, someone starts to draw in their imagination, someone composes poems.
Think, please, about your fictional, virtual, or maybe real shelter and think about what you would do there now to calm down, relax and feel protected.
If there is a real shelter, a dacha, or, for example, sometimes men say, this is a garage, I repair a car, and neither wife nor daughter goes there.
You can do your business there. One of the interesting examples is that a lady in my group said, you know, I have a small apartment in a remote area, and no one knows about it.
I come there and start drawing, just as I did when I was a child, because drawing calms me down. But really, since there is a lot of work and children and a husband at home, I don't have time to do it.
There were cases when one of the young participants said, you know what kind of shelter I have? I have a private plane, and it really takes her, and she makes loops.
And I was surprised, she was calm and careful in the group. I said, is it true? I can't believe you. And suddenly from another part of the room a young man said, yes, it's true.
I said, how do you know? I'm her husband. I said, do you also fly on a plane and make loops? No, never. For this young lady, the participant of my seminar, it was the same shelter where she could feel the freedom of flight, the absence of any restrictions.
This space, and everyone has their own. Someone sits behind the wheel and drives around Moscow at night. This is also a shelter, this is also an ability to feel a different state, a different image, to visualize yourself and your life in a different way.
It can be a real situation or an invented situation. To be honest, for our biocomputer it doesn't matter. We really rest and calm down.
Or it's the image that allows us to be in a different space for two or three, a maximum of five minutes. And to feel that we are calm again, that we have energy, that we want to live and work again.
There are images that always give energy. This is the image of flight. I sometimes ask my participants, what kind of birds are you? Men often say, we are eagles. Women are swallows.
I had a pretty big lady in my group, the president of one of the banks. She said, do you know, I'm a swallow. Everyone has an image of a flying creature. This is very good.
Images of flying always restore us. Because it's freedom from restrictions, norms, rules of our society, from instructions. There are also images of fire, controlled fire.
This is a candle, this is a fireplace, this is a fire, this is the sun. Someone loves sunrise, someone loves soft, warm sunsets. And when you feel tired, you came from a heavy, tiring meeting, you came from the office of the head, please sit down in the chair and think for a minute or two or three that there is a good image, soft, calm.
You have a fireplace at home or in the country house. You sit next to the fireplace and the warm fire that you feel and see calms you. This is also possible even at work, without going anywhere.
You stay in this image for a minute or two or three, come back, you will feel different. And, of course, all water images, everything related to water. Someone imagines a bubbling stream, becomes a waterfall, purely virtual.
Someone imagines a small, cozy, warm swamp, I don't know, frogs quacking in the forest, and someone imagines the vastness of the ocean. Everyone has their own image.
What is better, a bubbling stream or a small swamp or a vast ocean? You need to believe, trust yourself that the image that arises is needed at this moment.
Another important thing. We forget that the most powerful force is in ourselves. And it is most often embedded in childhood. Each of us has good, warm, joyful situations in childhood that are useful to remember.
For example, people talk about such situations. I had a very busy woman, 48 years old, she leads an institution, her own company, she has several hundred employees, three children, a husband.
She has a lot of people who, frankly, watch her, she leads, they watch her, she finances her whole clan. And she said that quite often, especially when she gets very tired in the car, she is driven by a driver, she thinks about childhood.
She remembers the morning when she didn't have to go to school, she remembers the morning when she woke up and her mother was baking pancakes in the kitchen.
And this smell of pancakes and conversations between father and mother in the remote kitchen, in the apartment, she remembers very often because it is protection for parents, it is a free day, it is childhood.
And all the intonations, good warm intonations, associated with childhood, are associated with this image. And she becomes good, quiet, calm, and she is ready to work again.
One participant, a man, told another image that supports him. Back then, when there were pioneer camps, his mother often sent him to the pioneer camp, and his father and mother parted early in the morning.
And his mother, as it happens wrong, but life is life, was not very happy when her father came to meet her son. And knowing this, he always came alone to the pioneer camp to meet his son.
And now the father has arrived, and they began to walk around the pioneer camp, and warm, soft summer rain began. They sat down somewhere on the bench, and the father took out an umbrella, and he pressed our participant, who was already more than 40 years old, at the time when he was still small, to his father.
And this soft, warm rain, a strong person close to him, and the state of calmness, of protection that he experienced then, he remembers for the rest of his life, and it gives him energy.
The father is no longer in this life, but in fact, the care and strength of the father still help him. Each of us has a child's situation that gives us strength and energy.
So, return to Eilers, and you will feel how protected, calm, balanced everything that was related to childhood will be again.
One more exercise for completion. The authors of this exercise are boyars, husband and wife, Americans. Think about your problem now. Just think. Formulate your problem, whether it is a personal or work problem, in two or three words.
My problem is... Please, remember about the person, it can be a colleague or a manager or a close person, with whom you recently discussed your problem.
Remember, let it be a picture, an image. What did he say, what did you answer? Where was it? What time of day?
And when this picture is already clear, take a green marker in your imagination and circle this picture, and internally get out of this circle.
You, this person, manager or a close person or a colleague, everything is in a circle, the problem is in a circle, and we will now start our little psychological journey.
Think about the house you live in, many apartments, many people, many neighbors. Especially, you feel it clearly when you come home in the evening, the windows are burning, and in each window there are families, people, some difficulties, difficulties or some joys in their lives.
Think about it now. Think about the microdistrict or village you live in. Think about how many people surround you, and everyone has their own life with their own worries, and, to be honest, with joy and achievements.
Think about the city you live in. Try to see this city from above in your image. And think about how your region is developing.
Try to see a huge number of cars on the streets, people, the dynamics of this development, movement, transport. And think that each of the people who drive a car or just walk down the street also has their own life.
Think about our Russia, about the northern, southern, western, eastern borders. Think about how difficult it is for this country to live now.
I recently heard the phrase, Russia has been embodied in Moscow. The capital regions, not only Moscow, but any industrial regions, are now developing powerfully, perhaps, often, attracting a huge crowd of people who are forced to do business.
Think about Russia and about our good optimistic prospects. We are achieving all the achievements that other countries have achieved in hundreds of years, we have been doing it for decades.
Imagine that in this system there is a small planet, the blue Earth, which moves along its own trajectory.
And now, when I speak, it also continues its movement. And our life on this Earth is a rather short moment, but bright, filled with the meaning of existence.
Feel, please, the space, its boundlessness, its eternity as clearly as possible. And, holding the feeling of space, return to your problem.
Think about your problem, which you thought about at the very beginning. Try to formulate this problem in two or three words. I am sure that the significance of your problem will be much less for you.
Many people say, it's not a problem at all, it's just a difficulty, a barrier, I can overcome it. In general, in the scale of the space, it's a small, not so significant issue. And in the future of my life, it's not a problem, but a difficulty, a barrier, which will be overcome by me.
Such internal journeys, images, which we have just talked about, are all visualization techniques.
Of course, you felt that it was a bit of an autotraining. But it doesn't take tens of minutes, hours, two or three hours to feel that your hand is warm and heavy. We don't have time for that.
And when we call a habit from our childhood or a positive image, we recover very quickly. Three, four, five minutes, not much, no more than five minutes is not necessary.
Sometimes participants say, you know, I don't want to return to Earth from space. I say, you have to return. Five minutes is the maximum we can afford to wander through our inner space in order to return and start living and working again.
Without stress, joyfully, optimistically, conveying your optimism to others. Our inner state really often depends on this file, the feeling of emotion.
We talked about how to manage this file when external stress is imposed on us, that is, intensity, difficult meetings, aggressive negotiations with pressure to our address, or criticism from the leaders or colleagues.
But there is also internal stress that we ourselves are able to strengthen. And it is reflected in this file. It is difficult for us to live emotionally when we are on this cart with a load of life problems, we also have internal problems.
I mean, first of all, problems of emotional addictions. In my book, Career without Stress, there is a paragraph, the career at the cost of life.
It was my client, a long-term client, with whom we had occasional meetings over the course of about three years, that is, a real professional coaching. I came to him, we discussed some situations, solved some issues, and my visit was over.
And when I arrived, the client was very seriously promoted in the bank, he became the second person after the founder, after the president, the first deputy. I entered a huge office and walked to his table for a long time.
And when I came up, I said, Sergey, I want to congratulate you on your success, this is really an achievement. And he said, you know, Natalia, it's very difficult for me here, I'm alone here.
There, in my department, I had subordinates, almost friends, we discussed some problems together, and here there is responsibility, there should be distance, I solve some difficult financial issues, and here I am alone.
Very often successful managers talk about loneliness in the profession. I said, Sergey, then why are you in this office? And he says, I prove to my father that I am strong.
And I said, Sergey, is your father still alive? He says no. But still, the father was a successful official at that time, a large official, and always talked about Sergey as the only son.
He said to his son, you are weak, you will not succeed. And at the peak of his father, Sergey built his career, proving to him that he was successful, that he was capable, that he was as strong as his father.
Dear friends, of course, my visits to this bank became more frequent because Sergey was tired, he was burning out. He often said, you know, there is a meeting, I want to go out and walk the streets, just breathe some fresh air.
His health began to deteriorate a little, and the time came, about a year and a half later, he decided to go back to the linear level, to become a linear manager from top management, to become the head of his department, to return to the life that was more optimal for him, there was less stress.
A vertical career is not the only form of success. There is also a horizontal career, when a person becomes a more experienced professional, a more famous expert in their field, and rotates within the company, for example, moves to other niches, other positions, or takes other new projects, this is also a success, an achievement.
A vertical career, which is connected with power, with managing people, with control, with responsibility, and often with the need for distance, loneliness, in this sense, becomes especially stressful if it is tied to solving these inner child problems, to prove to the father that I am strong.
In fact, internal stress is reduced when we solve our problems correctly, related to our relationship with our parents. Everyone has them.
It is considered right if the emancipation from parents, that is, our transition to adult life, begins in adolescence, at the age of 13-16, and ends at the age of 30-33, the so-called age of Christ, the first serious growth.
And for men and women. Because then we begin to live our lives, then we make a career, achieving our goals and striving to realize our own values.
Then we stop, if it happened, emancipation, we said no, I have my own life, my parents, we said no, I have my own goals, no, I want to work in this professional sphere, not where mom or dad says.
I don't compete with my father, because a father is a father, a close person, he helped me, and most importantly, he contributed to my birth. And then it's my life path.
Then we build an optimal career for ourselves, then we choose a person who is really close to us, because the influence of parents and their power is very often distributed in the personal sphere.
And, by the way, most often destructive, destroying families. Then we begin to live our lives and make the right decisions.
A person striving for success and a high psychological quality of life should do it on time, from 15-30 years old. Because a prolonged dependence on parents is a career worth living or health.
It's hyperfictionism, we call it the excellence complex. I should be doing well, I should have only A's in school, I should be successful at work, and I meet a lot of such young ladies in all regions.
Recently in Chelyabinsk, I was told in a group of successful young women, 30-35 years old, that we don't need families, we don't need children, we need a career and success.
I said, you know, it's good when a woman's life, any and a man's life, is built on a balance. There is a private sphere, there is a family, there is a job. Why are you striving for success?
And we found out during the discussion that, in fact, every participant is a daughter of a mother who demanded that she should be better, that she should have A's.
How come you only got A's today? Look, my friend's daughter only studies for A's. Or another typical phrase for us, if you study badly, you will work as a janitor.
It's a typical phrase in Russia. Or, all children are like children, and you are a child. These are the phrases of parents. These are their scenarios, which they, of course, under any positive pretext, impose on us.
What does a mother say? Or a father says? More often a mother says, I care about you, because I'm a mother. Or a father says, you have to be strong, I'm strong, my son must be strong.
50% is the truth of parents. But where is our next 50%? We know that parents wanted it, but entering adulthood we must realize our own desires.
Let it start with the first step, 50 to 50, mom, you're right, dad, you're right, but I have my own goals, these are our 50%, my own values. I want to choose the career that I'm interested in, I choose the person I need in my life.
And then our inner stress will be reduced, we will not live someone else's life. In fact, imposing your own scenario on the part of the parents is manipulating the child.
It's not a secret, a mother often says, I didn't achieve it, you must achieve it. Or a father says, I didn't become this, you must become this. In fact, these are the goals and values of a father or mother.
It's their life, and our life, the life of adults, must be connected with our goals and values. And when we keep our goals, we don't become a toy or a manipulation object.
And this is a very important point. It often happens when a person does not grow up in time. There are many examples when a person leads a company, but internally he is not an adult.
If a son depends on his mother, I always come to the company and think, where is an adult woman who really leads the company? Where is this informal leader, a gray cardinal who really leads the company?
Indeed, I always find it. It can be the chief accountant, from whose opinion everything depends. It can be a lawyer who wins the trials and makes decisions.
Or vice versa. If a son depends on his father, then always a more mature, experienced employee or vice-client has an influence on him.
It's dangerous in business from the point of view that decisions are made with money, people, resources. The leader does not formally take decisions, he can be an founder, he invested money and has his own company.
But an informal leader who manages the situation as he sees fit. It's always an internal stress for a person who is being manipulated because he always feels tension and he is uncomfortable to work and live.
It's always, to be honest, offensive and unfair because it's like they take away a part of life or a part of work.
I would like to finish the analysis of this question with the following phrase. Live your life and then you will not have exhausting, uncomfortable internal stress, which is due to the fact that a person strives to be independent all his life, but he does not succeed.
Another question related to this important file of feelings, emotions and experiences is asked in groups very often.
When people say, ok, Natalia, we understand everything, these images help to switch for 2, 3, 4, 5 minutes, it's like a little rest, time out.
But if it's not enough for me, it doesn't help me at all, I've been doing it for a long time, and even in traffic jams I can turn off, look at the sky and see what good clouds, how great it is, what good weather.
And yet after a while, 5, 10, 15 minutes, I feel the accumulated fatigue again. What to do? Of course, here this principle, the main technique of break, time out, switching remains relevant.
The only thing is that it needs to be done in real life and more prolonged. Now not those long vacations that used to be once a year for 2-3 weeks or twice a year for 2 weeks, but people began to take mini-vacations for 5-7 days and go somewhere.
It is important to completely change the situation. It can be from the capital city to the village where you need to carry water, heat the stove, clean the snow around the house.
A wonderful village life, a healthy village life, or a trip to the warm sea, or mountain skiing, or a wellness hotel or spa hotel.
Who loves what? Please decide in your mini-vacation what you like best. Passive relaxation, wellness and spa procedures, or vice versa, drive, excitement, extreme.
It can be rafting, parachute jumping, extreme driving. Everyone has their own choice. It is important that we allow ourselves to rest and switch 4 times a year with a good company or a close person.
With such a positive communication. But it is important that when you return you feel completely renewed. Do it as a way of your life, as a rule.
Then you will feel that every time you wash off the accumulated stress. Do not tighten, do not accumulate stress so that it is overfilled with a bowl. Then you will really need to take a prolonged rest.
But we don't have time for that. So, a vacation 3-4 times a year. The vacation you like, the vacation you can afford financially. This is the best thing you can recommend now to quickly release the accumulated stress.
There is another file that we must talk about. This is our unconscious. If you remember Freud's main idea, he said that a person only thinks that he is consciously and purposefully making decisions and doing things.
In fact, it is a game of his unconscious. And a person only interprets, evaluates, analyzes what has come out. Or another image that Freud drew for us. He said that our unconscious is a flying horse.
And we are only a rider with our will and consciousness that pulls the leash, trying to set the course for the moving animal.
If we translate it into modern language, probably the unconscious content in our inner world, in this biocomputer, is 60-70-80%. This is really huge content.
What is there? First, it is our genetic memory. These are the scenarios, maybe the family tasks that our ancestors have given us.
There are such laws, they are called universal laws, which express, reflect, and record these contents. In particular, there is a law of synchronization.
We often repeat events in our fate, and they are even reflected in the numbers, for example, birth, marriage, departure from life of our ancestors.
We often repeat the actions of our ancestors. We often complete the tasks that were set before our grandfathers, grandmothers and great-grandfathers, great-grandmothers, but which they did not complete for one reason or another.
This is our genetic memory. Another content that is very much in the unconscious is our impressions. Not only positive, as we said a little in childhood, but also difficult, tense.
It can be a feeling of loneliness in the room of a small child, or a feeling of fear, a child who is being thrown by a barking dog. I tell all the specific examples from my consultations.
For example, a leader who was afraid and reacted uncomfortably to a cry, we analyzed his path and came to the conclusion that this is the 4-year-old age and his experience at this age when a barking dog threw at him.
These are really some impressions, fragments of impressions, quite often traumatic, which we received in childhood.
Our unconscious is also a scenario that we ourselves think through, try, from which we refuse. And our unconscious is also our desire to enjoy life.
In general, if we sum it up, we need not be afraid of the unconscious at all. If we sum it up, we need to say that our unconscious loves pleasure. Our unconscious is drawn to acceptance and love.
And then what is the conclusion? How to use this file to reduce stress? Please think that our unconscious is really dissatisfied with something.
When you get up in the morning and seem to have said positive phrases, or you come to the mirror and return to positive images, and still something is not good, something is not liked, it seems to be some kind of misfortune, it is not clear why.
It is not clear why, but it is our unconscious. What should be done to calm this strange, incomprehensible file, part of our existence?
The first thing we should think about. Every day, even if it is a small event, but you need to think about doing something pleasant to yourself.
You wake up in the morning. Tell me, please, what will be pleasant for me today? Yes, there will be work, there will be meetings with colleagues.
Maybe in the evening you will go to buy something for yourself, a small shopping, but very interesting. A man may come and buy an interesting DVD, a woman may buy a small souvenir or something from cosmetics.
I had one participant who said, Natalia, if you came to my house and went into my bathroom, you would say that this is a chemical laboratory. I come after work and immediately remember that I go to the bathroom, and there I have different creams, lotions, I take care of myself, and it is a pleasure for me.
Here she has a bath, it is not a chemical laboratory, it is a small spa hotel where she enjoys herself. It can be any hobbies, hobbies that help a person calm down.
It can be home flowers. There was one participant who said, I come to the apartment and I need at least an hour and a half to water each flower, but I am in a good mood.
Other participants said, well, okay, they don't talk, so we are in a good mood, we are getting rid of communicative stress. Yes, it is certainly true, but it is a hobby, where a person enjoys, calms him down unconsciously.
Now it has become fashionable, in a good sense of the word, business fashion, accepted among successful people to be involved in something else. Someone starts drawing, I will return to this again, it is a calming of one's unconscious.
Someone starts collecting. It is very important, among other things, for the unconscious, that someone next to us treats us very well. It is great, it is lucky in life if someone sincerely loves us.
But if it did not happen for one reason or another, then a small pet, a cat or a dog, is also one of the techniques, if I may say so, to calm our unconscious.
I remember one of the cases that I had in one of the companies. I came to the company to do a pre-training diagnosis. The head said, please find a conflict person. I felt tension between the units, I felt some kind of discomfort.
I said, maybe you will tell me who starts the conflicts. I talked to many people, it was 27 people, and it turned out that one of the employees was a very tense and conflicting person.
When we started talking to her, it turned out that she was a lady, over 40 years old, nothing happened, it happens in life. She has no children, no marriages, and she lives alone. She has a cat, whose name is Musya.
When she tries to tell something about her family at corporate parties or in the corner of conversations, as others do, and she tells about her family, and her family includes her and her cat, everyone laughs at it.
I had enough to talk to several people in this company, informal people who asked a ton of public opinion, that the cat Musya is the creature that accepts, loves its owner.
It is very important to respect another woman's fate and listen to her admiration for this cat or her story. Because it is as important as a story about a child, a husband or a wife.
As a result, she was involved in communication in the company, and the conflicts were exhausted.
The first thing is a hobby, a hobby, a little pleasure. This must be included in the plan of our day. And in general, when we write a list of things, in the evening, be sure to schedule a time.
For example, I talk to my son for 30 minutes. If I can, an hour and a half, it will be even better. In the evening I will buy myself a Toto. I will spend 40 minutes in communication with pleasant friends.
It must be a position, a point in your work plan that allows you to maintain your ability to work at a high level and that allows you to calm our unconscious sphere.
The second point is that there must be hobbies and time spent on them in order to feel a sense of pleasure. It can be drawing, it can be singing.
For example, many people are engaged in singing. It can be mastering a musical instrument. This is also very good now. Imagine a corporate party, you come out of the guitar and start singing something. Your status changes.
People see you from the other side. You sing the song you chose. This is part of your image. I assure you that a month or a month and a half after the corporate party you will be popular in the company or in the department.
You take pictures, make a vernissage of your own photos for a corporate party and hang them on one of the walls and people will start talking about you too. You can become popular, successful and join the contacts and communications in your department or company with your hobby and passion.
Moreover, you can find out that other colleagues have the same interests. Someone is also engaged in photography, someone is raising pets, someone is engaged in singing, someone is engaged in musical instruments. Imagine how many new friends you can get in your office and how you can improve, make your business contacts more effective.
We remember that the principle of pleasure, hobby and passion are important for our unconscious. And the feeling of freedom that we get only in creativity.
There is another file that we haven't talked about. You see, it is at the base of our scheme. I called it the body. It is our psychophysics, our physicality.
And there are also laws. You probably noticed that when chronic burnout occurs, such exhausting, constant, long-term stress, then the head starts to hurt, colds are cleared.
Our well-being is really deteriorating. This is already affected by psychosomatic. It is a dangerous symptom.
If we positively perceive ourselves and others, if we have learned to regulate our emotions, if we understand what our unconscious needs, then we should not forget that a healthy lifestyle is also our basic competence.
Now the cult of a healthy lifestyle, which makes me very happy, is in almost all offices. You know that more and more companies have a clear place where you can smoke.
I remember a company in Moscow that, moving to another new office, agreed with the employees that they allocate only one place in the company, between the second and third floors, where you can really get together and smoke a cigarette.
I know of a company that specifies the time you can spend on smoking. I remember the case of the corporate standard in this company, which is formulated approximately like this.
You can smoke for three minutes before lunch and only three minutes after lunch. Moreover, in solitude, not with someone else in the company. Because we know that when we are with someone else, we start talking, that it is 2, 3, 5 cigarettes, maybe not 3 minutes, but 5, 15, 20 minutes.
Now in offices, in many companies, they control the time that is allocated for smoking. And not only because it is paid time, and nothing is done during this time.
I agree with this, maybe it is right. But smoking itself is an unhealthy lifestyle. And companies try to regulate the time spent on it, and even take away a certain place.
The fact remains that there are companies that do not even allow their employees to smoke in the office. Moreover, already in Moscow, there are companies in our Russian cities where you can not smoke for your employees even near the office.
I think that such an official corporate policy of fighting smoking may not be liked by everyone. But this is a reflection of the cult of a healthy lifestyle that we are forced to support if we want to be successful.
My observations are interesting. If you go to an elite village, consult, for example, I often go, and it happens that I go very early, at 8 or 9 am, and you see a lot of people running around the village who are engaged in a healthy lifestyle.
And in the morning, recently, I had an impression that the president of a company was running around with his wife, and they were sweating, and a car was following them, and there was a guard in a white shirt and tie. It looked interesting.
But the fact remains that people thought about being healthy. And if we go to the outskirts of the city and see a not very elite area, we will return at 12 o'clock, and people just leave their homes, worn out, not sleeping, and immediately have cigarettes in their teeth.
And I see that successful people get up early, run, give up smoking, and people who said no, life goes on and on, they do not lead a healthy lifestyle. A healthy lifestyle is our important basic competence.
It's not just a long-term dream, a refusal to smoke and excessive alcohol, but also the right way to spend the day. Dear friends, let's think about how to live our day right.
We wake up in the morning, it's wrong to rush out of bed and shout that you're late or you're late, that you need to hurry. Please get up 15-20 minutes earlier.
For the body, 15-20 minutes of lack of sleep does not mean anything. But they will give you an opportunity not to rush from the very beginning of the day.
I always look sadly in traffic jams when people start to turn the wheel of the car to make it in time, especially when I'm driving. I see a car that is being cut and I drive up to it and look to the right.
I always look at the owner of the car with pleasure because we drove up on time, he still did not win these 15-20 minutes. I always look at the car as a specialist.
Sometimes I look at my neighbor as a specialist on the 4th floor trying to start the car, especially in the cold days. He can't do it, he runs around because he's in a hurry.
Every time I think, why did you get up 15-20 minutes later? Because you need to hurry, and hurrying is stress. The time limit, hurrying, when we lack time, when time is pressed, we need to know what it is.
One of the most important stress factors, one of the dominant stress factors. Moreover, let's go back to our morning. We just woke up. Your alarm clock, as Rick Bray says, should sound quiet and gentle.
Because the alarm clock, the phone call is the same stress factor as an electric shock. On the carpet, they are not dangerous for life, but very unpleasant.
So, if we start the day in a hurry, we start the day with stress. Get up early so as not to hurry. If we start the day with a sharp sound, make sure that there is no sharp sound at the beginning of the day. Then there will be no stress.
The beginning of the day with a stressful state is a program of stress during the whole day. So, you got up. Good, you are not in a hurry. You move around the apartment slowly enough, getting ready for work.
Be kind. Start the day with the pleasure we talked about, nourishing your unconsciousness. Dress in a color that is pleasant for you. Let it be a bright color. Someone likes yellow. It is really warm.
In general, for Slavs, yellow is the color of the sun, warmth, coming spring. Someone likes red. It is also a great color for us because it is energy, it is a rise of the spirit.
Someone likes blue. Especially emotional people like blue because it disciplines. And someone likes green, because for irritable people it is the color that calms.
Dress in the color you like. Eat something delicious that you like. And slowly, without hurrying, get out of the house. If you drive, try to find routes so that you do not get stuck in a traffic jam.
If you get stuck in a traffic jam, think about positive images. If you are driving on public transport, go to the areas of your path where you meet positive people. You know that a woman always smiles in a kiosk. Ask her questions.
Exchange impressions of the day, jokes, smiles, and you will feel that your mood is rising.
You came to the office. Friends, please, do not start the day with discussing the sports achievements of your favorite team or, as it happens among women, discussing what terrible happened in the family the previous evening.
The son got a two, the husband said an unfair word. It is not necessary. Discussing sports achievements can take up to an hour and a half. Discussing husbands and children is also a long time.
But the fact remains that we start with either a very driving or not very pleasant topic. The right start of the day. Take the bull by the horns. Do your work right away, priority business.
It will give you a sense of calm, the right program. Moreover, it is even recommended to eat a raw frog. Do an unpleasant but priority business.
Why? To reduce your own stress. To say to yourself, great, I have already overcome my unwillingness. And the day will go on very well.
Priority business, even unpleasant, will give us an opportunity to use the fresh brain in the morning to solve serious problems.
You have done an important thing. You can rest. Do not forget about rest. Three or five minutes between tasks is very important. Naturally, we have come to lunchtime.
Everyone knows that it is bad and wrong to have a snack at work. It is so. Do not do this. Everyone knows that you need to have lunch for at least 30 minutes. Do not shorten your lunch to 15 minutes or 10-15 minutes of snacking at work.
In addition to the fact that you are doing it wrong in terms of health, but if we talk about our well-being, about stress, we just do not have time to calm down during lunchtime.
But you need to calm down. Imagine, we went to a cafe or a restaurant, especially in a business center. It is present next to our company or in your company.
We start to have a full lunch. We switched to taste sensations. We talked to colleagues. Everyone knows that a good lunch calms you down.
Even if the beginning of the day was tense, after lunch, people usually feel calmer and more balanced. Moreover, experienced clients know that if we call a VIP client, a large client, it is better to call right after lunch.
A person usually feels good. The working day goes on. What is the right way to end a working day if we talk about healthy style of behavior in the office? Of course, it is to sum up.
The feeling of completion, that I did something important during the day, is an amazing pleasure. I have seen happy people in the office who take lists, if the program or plan of the day is a vote-look, they print out a list of work.
And they happily, with colorful markers, mark what was done. It gives a feeling of completion, that the day was not in vain. Moreover, green markers are often highlighted with priority cases, and red ones with small cases.
And then they look at how many important tasks were done and how many small ones. They try to reduce small cases and increase the number of important priority cases.
After such a good end of the day, you need to remember that there is a dead zone. Please leave the office at the time that is officially recorded by the company.
18.00 or 19.00. It is called the dead zone. Share your life, this is the right healthy lifestyle, in two halves. The first half is work, profession. The second half is private life.
This is the right healthy lifestyle, this is an antistress program, support, if there is such an individually found balance of work and home.
Because if only home, we know it, it is routine, monotony, if we do not work, especially in women's fate, it happens sometimes, a woman does not work, it is domestic depression, it is routine, monotony, it is the same, repetitive, sometimes boring things.
But if we only work, so-called workaholism, and now, unfortunately, not only men, as before, but also women began to say, well, Natalia, I leave in the morning, my children, women, I emphasize, are still sleeping, and when I come, they are already sleeping.
This is also a wrong lifestyle, because it is a squirrel in a wheel, it is all the energy, all our talents and gifts are given to work.
It is bright colors, bright emotions at work, and gray, boring, something at home, it happens very often. Or in general, a person comes home very late, after the dead zone.
I remember that tourist company where we did stress management training, and the wise manager on the flip chart drew the time 19.00 and wrote the dead zone, we are leaving the office.
And then she asked the security guard to bypass the office and offer people to go home. After a while she called me and said, Natalia, I even pay security if she turns off the electricity so that computers do not work, so that people go home.
Unfortunately, I have to go back to this case. About a few months later, the manager called me and said, Natalia, in fact, I did not succeed, because people transfer their work home.
They have computers and they work at home. I came to this company and said, why did we agree on the dead zone, it is a healthy lifestyle. And one of the participants said, Natalia, you know, somewhere around 10 pm my mother calls and says, go home. I do not listen.
Then my son calls, I do not listen. Then my husband calls, it's already 1 am, I do not listen. But when they bring the phone to my beloved dog, she starts making sounds on the phone, then I get in the car and go home.
Of course, I agree, we work a lot. But still, especially in the second half of life, when a person summarizes, he first of all talks about children, family, his clan, so to speak.
And he remembers those years when he could not divide his life into two halves, and most of it was spent on work, and most often he regrets it.
Not to mention that, especially in the pre-pension and retirement age, and especially men, they do not know how to live if life was really devoted only to work.
Because the feature that is associated with retirement for a workaholic, first of all men, but now it becomes a workaholic and women, is associated with the question, how can I live without work?
And in fact, if we take a Western lifestyle, a healthy lifestyle, many Western people say, adults, mature people, when I leave work, life is just beginning.
I start traveling, doing some of the activities that I have postponed for a long time, and they meet this part of their life with joy only because there was no exhausting stressful workaholism for a long time.
So we have a dead zone, 18 or 19 hours. Be kind, carefully fold your papers, you have completed the day, emphasize what has been done, and come home with joy and pleasure.
The only thing from the perspective of a healthy lifestyle, an antistress lifestyle, I would like to say, when you knock on the door or open the door of your house or apartment, make a happy face.
Because very often people say, especially women, although this is typical for men, if a person came tired, stressed, tense, it would be better if he came late when we were all asleep, so as not to see his face.
Moreover, I will now tell you an example that was highlighted in one of the trainings, but not one participant said, I often say, a man comes home tired, irritated, and says, not a fact.
You know, I have a wife and two sons, when my wife comes home, I always shout to my sons, guys, close the door, mom has come. Everyone asked why.
Because she comes irritated, unhappy, she immediately says that she did not succeed at work, who competes with her, and, frankly, it's very hard. I would also like to communicate in peace in the house after work.
This does not happen, and therefore we close for 15-20 minutes. I say, why for 15-20 minutes? Because, he says, our pet dog runs out to meet her. And all her accumulated office aggression, her office stress is thrown at the dog.
I say, what is she doing? She scolds, says something to our pet dog. And after 15-20 minutes, I know from experience that she is calm now. And I always shout to my sons, kids, guys, everything is fine, you can go out.
A slightly funny case, anecdotal, a fact remains a fact, we can all remember our life situations when it was exactly the same when we come home irritated.
We don't need to do this, both men and women. The family is the leading key antistress resource in our life. We lick our wounds there, we rest there.
We can say that there is our refuge. And therefore everyone in this space needs it, but they are also able to help us to recover, calm down, feel that our life is safe, that we are thriving.
And if we will release our stress irritation on close people, this antistress resource will not work, will stop working. Indeed, the child will avoid us, he will look out, see an irritated mother or father and hide.
The spouse or wife will do the same and our family contacts will be violated. So, a healthy lifestyle is the right start of the day.
A healthy lifestyle is the absence of hurry, it is desirable to eliminate stress factors, especially at the beginning of the day.
A healthy lifestyle and a healthy style of behavior in the office is to perform priority tasks at the beginning of the day to feel satisfaction, so as not to hurry later.
A healthy lifestyle is a full lunch, it is right to leave work in time with a healthy style of behavior in the office, having successfully completed your day and having given part of your time to family affairs.
You can ask me, is it all regulated? Will I lead a healthy lifestyle if I regulate everything? Indeed, one of my participants wrote to me, Natalia, I do everything on my day, Saturday and Sunday, and I have time to do everything, but for some reason I have little happiness.
I must say, and this is also a healthy and joyful way of thinking and emotionally lifestyle, be kind, regulate your working day, your working week so as to completely free Saturday and Sunday and not make any regulations, but live these free days with your loved ones as you wish.
You will not hurry, you will go somewhere, you will communicate with children, you will listen to what your child says, and he will say very wise things.
You will sit in the family circle in the evening in front of the TV, turning on some positive programs, and it will be all right, and this is also a healthy lifestyle.
But the biggest stress, the deepest, begins when our top floor is burning and burning.
This is the spirit of our spirituality, part of our soul, and you see it depicted here at the very top. This is what is connected with our values, goals, meanings, scenarios, with our construction of our life and fate, which we ourselves carry out.
People are divided into two categories. There are internals who set goals and strive to achieve them, and there are externals who adapt to the circumstances.
Internals say, I set a goal, I achieved it, this is my achievement, this is my failure. They are usually more optimistic and energetic, and, by the way, more satisfied, especially in the second half of their lives, because they draw positive conclusions.
And externals are usually inclined to pessimism, to fatalities, they say, fate, circumstances, time. They are more predisposed to sadness and very often, especially in the second half of their lives, are not satisfied with the results they have.
They have, but the time has already passed. Externals often say that opportunities are lost. And internals, on the contrary, say that every moment of life is another opportunity.
Choose the style that you like. I say that an internal approach to life is more beneficial for us, because then we are really able to self-realize.
Then we can really satisfy our need for self-realization, which Abraham Maslow spoke about in the last century and which is very close to us now.
How to do it? In order to understand, determine, realize your values and your meaning, try to answer such questions.
Imagine that now you can choose any historical time in the past. What time would you choose? You are interested. And who would you imagine yourself in this time?
Perhaps someone chooses antiquity and this freedom of dialogue. Perhaps someone chooses... I recently heard in a group that one of the participants said,
I am Elizaveta, that is, the royal court and some sophisticated relations in this court. Someone chooses the estate and the economy in this estate. Think, please, historical time and who you are in this time.
By the way, if you are a woman, it is not a fact that you will choose a woman's role. Maybe you will see your male role. If you are a man, it is not a fact that you will choose a male role. Maybe you will see some female existence.
Analysis of such an image allows you to feel your second, or maybe some additional, self and to push for some value, some goal that you did not think about before.
In general, if we talk about this very top floor of spirituality, it is our illusion that this floor consists only of one self. There are many selves, many different selves, many different beginnings.
And the fullness of life of the inmates is often due to the fact that they are able to move from one self to another. Think, please, now about the future time and who you are in this time if you choose the future.
What are you doing? How do you look? How do you feel? Maybe it is a spaceship to another planet. Or maybe it is the other way around. It is the earthly existence. It is also a part of our self.
Another very important question. Imagine that you have a magician in front of you and she says, I will fulfill the most important of your wishes, which, as you think, is now unnecessary.
What wish would be relevant for you? Our spirituality, our goals, values and meanings are very acute. We feel it in our teenage years. It is 10, 12, 15, 18 years. This is also the end of the teenage years, the beginning of youth.
But then we forget it successfully. We start to agree with others. We are told that you cannot do this, you are not capable of this, no one can do this.
But now, when I ask this question, it will be very good if you remember your teenage dreams.
We already know that if we build a program of our life, believing that this is our gift, it will happen, it will be successful, it will be updated, it will happen.
If we say, no, I can't do anything, I'm a weak person, I have circumstances, then it won't happen. We build our own program.
Now in the groups many say that the phrase of Paolo Coeli has been remembered, if you really want, the whole universe will go against you, it will come true.
Our file, which is connected with spirituality, will really give us an opportunity to overcome this deep exhausting stress, which is connected with the loss of meaning, work and life, when we make our life to realize our value or our goal.
So, you chose the historical time, you determined an unfulfilled dream, and when we started talking about it, you thought, why is it unfulfilled, it can be realized.
Moreover, now more and more people are starting to change their profession, not only at 30-35, but at 40-45, to another professional sphere.
As the great Freud said, every person has 7 geniuses, 7 gifts, and we can make only one life.
Many of us are already trying to make two of our gifts, three, maybe four. It's all the fullness of existence and the reduction of stress, dissatisfaction with ourselves on this file, on the file of spirituality.
You are interested, then we will move on. Write a fairy tale about your life. What is a fairy tale?
It's some kind of beginning. There is a main character or heroine who has set some goals, there is some route. And, of course, there are bad, evil forces that prevent you from achieving this route, to realize this route and achieve the goals.
Describe, please, how you fight against these bad forces, how you win, what you do. Any fairy tale ends with a happy ending, a good, positive, victorious result.
In fact, through such a fairy tale you can see your life in one image, moreover, you can write down, program your success.
I had a very respectable person in one of the groups. He came to the stress management with two guards. They were behind him. And he also wrote a fairy tale.
Before writing it, he was surprised. He said, Natalia, why do I need this? I have 1,200 people under me. And he looked at me harshly. But when he started writing the fairy tale, after a while his face smoothed out, he calmed down.
And when he finished his story, he shook my hand and said, thank you very much, I made a decision. Of course, I didn't know what decision he made. There is no need to ask. There is business. There are a lot of questions that should be closed for an external consultant.
But the fact remains. Through this fairy tale, through this holistic narrative, apparently, he determined a goal for himself that he had to reach.
If you feel insecure, depressed, and feel that you are losing the purpose and meaning of your existence again, maybe you will write a story about your heroic past.
A story about a heroic past is also a description, a fixation of your goals and values. Describe where you started. For example, the company started working on the basement floor. It's called beautifully.
There were three people in the basement. Look at the result. Now there are 300 people in the company. Two floors of this business center are yours. There were several clients then. Now there are dozens of clients.
There were such turnovers then. Now you are proudly saying large numbers. Then there was only the central office in your city. Now there is a territorial representation and you have turned into a holding.
This description or discussion also gives an opportunity to push again for your goal, value, and meaning of your office career or private existence.
Another exercise, an offer. Imagine yourself at 70 years old. This is a good age. You still have the ability to work, vitality, good health, but most of your life is already behind.
This is the so-called golden age when the results are drawn. Regardless of how old you are now, imagine yourself on this day, at this hour, in the future when you are 70 years old.
It would be great if you could see where you are, who is around you, how you look, and what you are doing. I would not want you to see yourself in the office, surrounded by colleagues or subordinates.
It is a very long office job, life. I would like you to see yourself among your loved ones, maybe on a trip.
Think, please, from the position of a 70-year-old man, what is important, valuable, leading in your existence now, for him, who is already wise.
When you think about yourself at 70, what will you highlight? Will you regret something? Will you be delighted with something?
Try to highlight priorities, important, serious values, that will give you vitality up to 70 years old. You will not devalue them yourself at 70. You will say, yes, I spent my life on this.
Another very interesting and important technique. Take a clean sheet of paper. Especially when you do not have enough time and energy.
And when there is acute dissatisfaction, and you feel that this dissatisfaction is associated with values, divide the clean sheet of paper into two halves. And on the left, write the lesson from the position, I must or I must.
The first, the second, and so on. It can be 12 positions, it can be 2 positions, it can be 42 positions, as many as you want.
So what are you doing now? At the moment, from the position, I must or I must. Your debts. You force yourself. You say, I must work well, I must be a good father, I must be a good husband, and so on.
And then, when you list all your lessons from the position, I must, and you will not find anything else to write, go to the right of the page and start a list of lessons from the position, I want.
The first, the second, and so on. What would you like in your present moment in life? Your desires, your preferences, your dreams, your images.
Anything. It can be very important, it can be less important. And then compare the two lists. If you get a serious imbalance in the magnitude of the lessons and the number of these cases, what do you do?
You start from the position, I must or I must. For example, there are 12 positions, and there are only 2, and you don't know what to write. Then life is not built correctly. Then a part of your valuable self is not realized in the spiritual file.
Then in the second half of your life there will be acute dissatisfaction. You will say, I did not realize what I wanted in my youth, I will not be able to do it because time has passed. And then there will be acute dissatisfaction.
Rarely, almost never, I rarely met when this part of the list really prevails. A person does a lot of things from the position, I want a lot more. Let's turn this list over.
Here are 12 positions, and here are only 2. This is very rare in an adult state. How can this be interpreted? Well, probably, a person is primarily aimed at himself, at self-realization. Maybe this is the age period when you really need to realize your self.
In general, this is a search period. It's good if it ends close to this age, 32-33 years, but in Western culture it is even allowed to look for yourself until 35 years old.
And yet, this is a search period. When a person tries different things, switches from one profession to another, and gets satisfaction and joy in the profession that is really adequate to his inner spiritual sound.
A great result. When the first and second lists are basically equal, here are 12 positions, and here are about 11-12 positions, then a person's life is built on such an equal balance.
I owe my debts as an adult, my responsibilities, and my desires, my aspiration. About equal sound. And a wonderful result when some of the formulated positions are identical.
Literally the same. For example, if I work in a variety advertising agency, I have to be a creative person. I have to come up with new ideas.
And here he wrote that he wanted new ideas to appear more often, more vividly. And the first and second positions intersected, and in fact they do the same thing.
This is great. A wonderful result when there are at least 30% of such intersections in this list. And if you see more than half of them, 60%, then your life is built harmoniously.
Then you succeed in pushing yourself, your own values, and your own goals. And then the goals that are born here, in the first place, are transferred to the modality of positions.
And then I can say that such a person will not be a client and patient of a psychologist for the second half of his life, because he will feel satisfaction and fulfillment.
And what gives us the most pleasure is the feeling that he has realized his gift. Aladimidova said, the greatest pleasure in life is to realize your talent.
I assure you, every person is talented. And this feeling that you have achieved, not just to go your own way, is what arises in this exercise, for example, and arises if our spiritual potential is realized correctly.
If you can say so, right. Right as it should be.
So, dear friends, now an important conclusion.
You see, we walked through all the floors, through all five files. And in each file there are techniques that help to reduce stress, to increase the ability to work, to become a resilient, bright, kind and successful, joyful person.
Please take this little journey as a Swedish table.
When you enter, for example, in the hotel, in the hotel, and there is a Swedish table, you pass a huge Swedish table and choose the dishes that you like.
Also, building your own individual anti-stress support, protection from stress, please choose the files that you like.
Emotional people, of course, need to start regulating their stress from the file of feelings, emotions. People who are rational, who like logic, will be able to persuade themselves.
A positive approach can be their technique. Spontaneous, creative, creative people. Please take care of your unconsciousness.
Now there are employees in the offices, and I see them, by the way, who lead a healthy lifestyle. But they assume that this is primarily muscle or fitness only, physically.
Please take care of your emotionally healthy lifestyle. And we all should remember that, perhaps, summing up the weeks, months, years, we should remember our spiritual existence, our spiritual fullness.
Because the main satisfaction in life is, of course, constant work with the file of values, goals and meanings.
I repeat, try to re-educate yourself, re-create yourself and make yourself an active internal builder of your own career and fate. Because it is they who are optimistic, it is they who are satisfied in life.
Every stressful state has its own dynamics. Let's talk about dynamics and see how we can work with it.
I usually draw such a graph. And then there are four points that are important to me. Point A, B, C and D.
Point A, B, C shows the level of our activity in a calm, normal state, when we are not stressed, we are not worried, we are not irritated.
Point A, B, C shows the level of our activity in a calm, normal state, when we are not stressed, we are not irritated.
So, we are in a calm state, we feel good, everything seems to be fine. But some conflict arose. For example, we are sitting, working, the manager passes by and says,
your table is always full of papers. He said in a displeased tone, he said in a irritated tone, maybe he is dissatisfied with something in his work.
And for some reason, such tension began inside us. The beginning of tension is necessarily associated with some conflictogen, some unpleasant situation, unpleasant factor.
To a certain point, I call it B, is a point that symbolizes a complete loss of control or partial loss of control.
When we look out the window after this shout from the manager, we don't want to work, 15-20 minutes pass.
The chronometer shows that people in offices experience up to 40% of their working time after a stressful situation. This is the point when our experiences begin.
We start shouting at each other, we slam the door. It happens. In one company, in my experience of consulting, there was an accounting staff who did not talk to anyone for two weeks.
So we have a very long timeout, and in families we know that this timeout is manifested in this way. Husband and wife quarrel while there are no children, they are silent. And when children appear, the child stands between them, the wife says, tell him this, this, this.
They used to write notes, now the child says, tell her this, this, this. Thus, in the second phase, stress manifests itself in a very different way.
What is this point before a certain point C? When everyone feels tired of swearing, fatigue arises, someone feels guilty, why is all this?
And very often a person swears at himself, I will never shout at my subordinates, I will behave correctly now. And we return to this point D, to a calm, normal existence.
Indeed, we should know this. This dynamics manifests itself in everyone, but everyone has their own scenario. Some have a long timeout, then a sharp stress, and then a calm state of return.
Others have such a timeout, small stress, they quarreled, reconciled, quarreled, reconciled. The third is after a serious conflict, after a while people simply do not talk.
I even lowered this line to the depressive zone, people do not talk, and then return to normal communication. What should we know?
Point B, complete or partial loss of self-control, automatically launches different scenarios.
If we want to control our stress with any technique from these five files, the first step we should take is to change our state of consciousness.
To change our state in the middle of the first phase, before we get to point B. For example, someone feels that the stress is increasing.
I mean, if we go back to this case, the leader, who apparently had some unsolved problem, went to the unit. If he feels the increase in stress, he should not be dropped, and should be sent to point B.
What kind of mess is on your table? Or any other sharp phrases that the leader says. Or maybe go out, walk down the corridor, talk to optimistic people.
Maybe go to a cafe and have some coffee. To switch to pleasant things. Some successful and experienced people have positive photos on their work table.
Recently, I saw a photo of a child, his daughter and his wife in a bank. And some river. I said, what a nice photo. He said, you know, it was rafting in Turkey.
We were transported along the desert for a long time, then brought back. And the river was knee-deep. But since we were tired of the heat, it was such a happy moment in our lives that I have this photo at home and on my table.
Every time I look at this photo, I feel like I'm going back to the situation. I feel pleasure. It was a very good rest. Thus, the competence of the leader, his antistress self-regulation, does not allow him to lose self-control.
How can this be done? Of course, it's a time-out, switching. But there are other very important things. Quite often, the leader takes on much more responsibilities than he can withstand.
I know from my experience that we are difficult to delegate, we are difficult to transfer competence. We have a lot of barriers. For example, one of the barriers is formulated as follows.
If you want to do a good job, do it yourself. As a result, the dead zone, 18.00, all employees run away from the office. Only the leader remains, who completes the work for his subordinates.
He is overloaded, exhausted. And, of course, in the morning, when everyone gathers in the office, everyone has a good rest, looks great, they have a great antistress program, the only one who does not follow antistress regulations is the leader himself.
You need to be able to delegate. Of course, you need to assign and reassign, maybe not very important, but sometimes important tasks. But also the employees themselves.
What to do if the leader is very often irritated, hot-tempered? I had an interesting example of my practice a few years ago. I was surprised, it was winter, I came to the company for a long time, because there was training, then an interview.
I came to the office all the time, the lady was smoking in a fur coat. I asked the employees why Anna Ivanovna was smoking in the office all the time. It was very harmful, she could catch a cold.
I was told, you know, she was diagnosing the boss. What's the matter? It turned out that they had been working together for a long time. She was waiting for the moment when he came to the office. She could feel in a good mood or in a bad one.
How does he get out of the car? How does he pass security? She makes an assessment and calls everyone who wanted to come to him in the morning and solve important issues. If he comes in a bad mood, no one goes to the office for about an hour or an hour and a half, because everyone waits for him to get into business.
If everyone is in a good mood, everyone runs to the office and there is a queue. The only thing is that Anna Ivanovna does not stand on Monday and does not track the mood of her boss. I ask why, it's also interesting. It turns out that they play football every Sunday and the boss is at the gates.
If you win, why stand? He is in a good mood. If you lose, no one comes to the boss's office all day. When I was resigning, I was asked, please tell me why you are in a good mood when you win, although it does not matter for business at all.
When you lose, it's bad. It's not reflected in money, it's just a game. And the boss, unfortunately, while not thinking that the anti-stress skill is his competence, said, well, the siege remains, Natalia.
In our private life, anything can happen in sports, but in the office we must know that irritation, irritability, bad mood should not affect the employees.
But if it happens, the team can adjust, like Anna Ivanovna, the team already evaluates its boss and knows that it is better not to go to him in a bad mood.
Or, you know, if your boss is shouting and running around the office, and you are sitting and listening, think about something good at this moment. Look outside, at the window, at the sky.
Think about what you will do when you come home. And if you have a vacation ahead, think about it. Take an internal time-out. Do not take his irritation close to your heart.
Be at a distance, but only so that if he asks you to repeat what I said, you can repeat it. Do not go completely into your dreams. But the main thing is not to take it close to your heart, because the boss's irritable, hot-tempered temperament also has its advantages, its positive sides.
As a rule, this is a responsible, dynamic, innovative person, a moving company. That is, there is something to respect your boss for.
But for this, you can forgive him for his sharpness and impudence, but the main thing is to be able to learn to keep an emotional distance, not to be infected by his scenarios, not to get to point B with him.
Because the boss has expressed himself, as we say sometimes, he has dropped his stress, and he does not have this scenario because he was in a hurry to his subordinates.
And the internal scenario begins with the subordinate. The boss left, said, what's wrong with you? And he went, he works in his office, or takes part in negotiations. And we sit, worry, suffer, look, and lunchtime is already starting, and we have not worked yet.
This is wrong. Thus, antistress corporate culture is expressed and manifested on two sides. The most important side is the antistress culture of the boss himself, of course.
His ability to slow down his negative impulses, not to shift them, not to broadcast them to the company. In addition to the fact that the team must adapt, and in addition to the fact that people have a response stress, it remains a fact, quite often competent people who are in demand on the market leave because of this.
More and more often people say, I want a good atmosphere in the office, I don't want humiliation. Moreover, they are transferred to the list of companies where they respect the personality.
And vice versa, there are lists of companies, so-called blacklists, where people are treated, humiliated, and people try not to go there. This is especially evident in industrially developed regions where there are few workers, more vacancies than free people.
This is the trend of the last two and a half years in Russia. There are not enough people. And people know that they can go to another company, get a good job, and maybe a really good atmosphere.
A good atmosphere, a beautiful office, respect for the personality are the same non-material factors for the staff, and as important as material. And vice versa, people often say, yes, they pay very well here, but I will go to a calm, friendly atmosphere, because I know I will work there longer, I will have better health, and moreover, I will have colleagues and friends there.
And here, a very tense atmosphere, I will have to spend the money I spend here, and then, unfortunately, God forbid, I will have to spend it on treatment. Many people say that now and make the appropriate conclusions.
So, what are the mistakes of a manager who does not have an antistress culture? First, the team must adapt. Not every team has such a lady, a practical psychologist, Anna Ivanovna, who helps the team adapt to the mood swings of her boss.
The second negative consequence is the loss of working time, because a person is worried. A significant leader, a significant person in his environment, his word, both positive and negative, the positive one raises, the negative one hurts.
Therefore, a person can work more successfully or less successfully, it depends on the manager. Many people tell me, I remember, up to now, a person has been working for 40 years, his first manager who said, analyzed my mistake, approximately, he said, you are good, you tried.
But here you made a mistake and analyzed the mistake, and then he said again, I act, you will succeed. In fact, this is a well-known principle of Harvard Business School, soft with a person, hard on problems.
But my client remembers his manager, because it rarely happens. Indeed, you need to praise a person, then analyze the mistake, and then inspire him to work.
Non-material motivation associated with the right management style, with a good atmosphere in the office, with support, with correct analysis of mistakes motivates no less than the salary.
Therefore, the second limitation is the loss of key, competent, required employees on the market. And the third limitation is the leader's own health. Because breakdowns, stress, loud voice, it only seems safe, in fact, his stress state destroys his own bio-computer.
Anti-stress culture is also manifested in the behavior of employees towards the manager and among themselves.
It is our task to perceive the behavior of the manager positively, to have emotional distance and not to take irritation and irritability close to heart, if the manager still manifests it.
To be able to distance yourself, calm down, work on yourself with various techniques, so that you can really implement the rule of ten minutes.
We are upset, then you tell yourself, I worry for ten minutes. You notice the time. And for ten minutes you are in an emotional state, then you start working with yourself, and then you analyze what the manager said.
Because maybe in an irritated state he said the right thing. And you go back to work. This mutual anti-stress culture is the key to success.
We have statistics for the last 15 years. The company makes a breakthrough, a business breakthrough, if the team is consolidated, if mutual assistance is developed, if the staff is loyal, including personally loyal to the manager.
And it's all connected with the non-material factors of motivation, with anti-stress culture. You can't run away from stress. Indeed, as Hans Selye said in 1936, the time has come to live in a tense period of life.
When the first state we will feel is stress. But we can and are able to regulate our stress just as our computer, the Kaspersky system, regulates and cleans it.
We can also regulate ourselves. The only difference is that we are a really complex biocomputer. If we invite a computer specialist to our program, we put a special program to our computer,
then we are the regulator that increases our efficiency, performance, success, and most importantly, increases the psychological and emotional quality of life.
And this is connected with our satisfaction, with our good completion of our life and professional path.
Dear friends, we talked about stress management, anti-stress culture, psychological protection that we must build in relation to manipulation.
These are important competences of a modern successful person. I wish you success in developing anti-stress self-regulation skills.